<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><title>TRiCYCLE Manual</title><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL-NS Stylesheets V1.75.2"/></head><body><div class="book" title="TRiCYCLE Manual"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title"><a id="d0e2"/>TRiCYCLE Manual</h1></div><div><div class="authorgroup"><div class="author"><h3 class="author">Peter Brewer</h3></div><div class="author"><h3 class="author">Daniel Murphy</h3></div></div></div></div><hr/></div><div class="acknowledgements" title="Acknowledgements"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e253"/>Acknowledgements</h2></div></div></div>
        <p> Funding for the development of TRiCYCLE has been provided by NWO section Humanities
            through the DCCD project and through the various patrons of the Malcolm and Carolyn
            Wiener Laboratory for Aegean and Near Eastern Dendrochronology. </p>
        <p> We would like to thank the numerous contributors to the open source libraries used by
            TRiCYCLE and its associated libraries. We would also like to thank Lars-Åke Larsson,
            Rémi Brageu, Pascale Fraiture, Henri Grissino-Mayer, Patrick Hoffsummer, Bernhard
            Knibbe, George Lambert, Catherine Lavier, Hubert Leuschner, Martin Munro, Ian Tyers and
            Ronald Visser for assistance understanding many of the data formats implemented. </p>
    </div><div class="chapter" title="Chapter 1. What is TRiCYCLE"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e56"/>Chapter 1. What is TRiCYCLE</h2></div></div></div><p>TRiCYCLE is a universal dendrochronology file format converter. It currently has
            support for reading and writing 17 different file formats:
            
            </p><div class="itemizedlist"><ul class="itemizedlist" type="disc"><li class="listitem"><p>Belfast Apple</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Belfast Archive</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Besancon</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>CATRAS</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Comman Separated Values (CSV)</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Corina Legacy</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Excel</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Heidelberg</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Nottingham</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Sheffield</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>TRIMS</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>TRiDaS</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Topham</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Tucson</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Tucson Compact</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>VFormat</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>WinDENDRO</p></li></ul></div><p> TRiCYCLE extracts both data and any metadata present in files and converts them to
            the Tree-Ring Data Standard (TRiDas) data model. As TRiDaS is capable of representing
            the full range of dendro data and metadata, it is then possible to write out the file to
            any one of the supported formats. 
        </p><p> Key features of TRiCYCLE are: 
            
            </p><div class="itemizedlist"><ul class="itemizedlist" type="disc"><li class="listitem"><p>Seamless support for units where possible</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Interpretation of all metadata</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Handling of different charactersets and line feeds from different
                        operating systems</p></li><li class="listitem"><p>Comprehensive warning and exception system which provides detailed
                        feedback when errors are detected in files</p></li></ul></div><p>
        
        </p><p>For a complete discussion of TRiCYCLE and its underlying libraries please see
                    [<span class="citation"><a class="xref" href="#BrewerInReview" title="TRiCYCLE: a universal dendro data conversion tool">Brewer (in review)</a></span>]
        </p></div><div class="chapter" title="Chapter 2. Installation"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e136"/>Chapter 2. Installation</h2></div></div></div><p>TRiCYCLE is a Java application and so can be installed on any modern operating system.
            To make installation more familiar though we have packaged it up into native installers
            for Windows, Mac OSX and Linux. Download the relevant package for your operating system
            from the <a class="link" href="http://tridas.sf.net" target="_top">SourceForge</a> website.</p><p>
            </p><div class="variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="term">Windows</span></dt><dd><p>Run the setup program and follow the steps. The program will be
                            installed to your hard disk and shortcuts added to your start menu. If
                            you do not have Java installed on your system or you do not have the
                            required version the installer will provide you with assistance to do
                            so.</p></dd><dt><span class="term">MaxOSX</span></dt><dd><p>Open the .dmg file in Finder. Drag the TRiCYCLE.app file into your
                            Applications folder, or wherever you'd like it installed. MacOSX comes
                            pre-installed with Java so there is no need to install it
                            separately.</p></dd><dt><span class="term">Linux</span></dt><dd><p>An Ubuntu deb package is provided for TRiCYCLE. Install this package
                            with your standard package manager (e.g. dpkg). It includes information
                            on all the dependencies required including Java therefore it should
                            install everything you need if you are running Ubuntu. On other
                            distributions you may find that the dependencies do not install
                            automatically and the TRiCYCLE installation fails. If this is the case
                            you will have to install the following dependencies manually:...</p></dd></dl></div><p>
        </p></div><div class="chapter" title="Chapter 3. How to use TRiCYCLE"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e166"/>Chapter 3. How to use TRiCYCLE</h2></div></div></div><p>The first step is to specify the format of your input file(s). Choose your input file
            format from the pull down list on the File List page. Then select the file(s) that you'd
            like to convert by clicking on the browse button. You can add files one at a time or in
            bulk. Once you have your list of files prepared you can then go to the Convert
            tab.</p><p> On the Convert page, the next thing you need to do is select the desired output
            format from the drop down list. Next, press the convert button and after a short delay
            your files should appear in the list below. At the bottom of the window, you'll see a
            summary showing how many files were processed, how many of the convertions failed and
            how many were converted successfully but with warnings. </p><p> The results of the conversion are shown in a tree view on the convert tab. Files that
            failed to convert are highlighted by a red cross along with a message explaining what
            went wrong. Each file that convered successfully and with no warnings is shown with a
            green tick icon below which are shown the output file or files. Depending on the input
            and output formats chosen, a input file may be converted into one or more output files
            as some formats can store just one series while others can store multiple series. </p><p> If there were warnings produced during the conversion process, then the file will be
            marked with a orange exclamation icon. Warnings can be associated with either the
            process of reading the input file, or writing the output file. They can also be related
            to a single series within the file or the input file as a whole. The warning messages
            are displayed to illustrate the context of the warning. Longer warnings will scroll of
            the edge of the window, but if you hover your mouse over the warning a tooltip will show
            the entire message.
            </p><div class="tip" title="Tip" style="margin-left: 0.5in; margin-right: 0.5in;"><h3 class="title">Tip</h3><p>If you would like to preview the result of the conversion process you can double
                click on the output files and they will be displayed in a text viewer. This option is
                not, however, available for binary formats such as CATRAS and Excel.
                </p></div><p> 
        </p><p> Once you are happy with the results of the conversion you can save the files
            permanently to disk by pressing the save button. It will offer you the option of
            specifying which folder to save the files to. </p></div><div class="chapter" title="Chapter 4. Options"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e183"/>Chapter 4. Options</h2></div></div></div><p> The options panel is available from the file menu. It is split into two sections:
            Reader config and Writer config. </p><div class="section" title="Character sets"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e188"/>Character sets</h2></div></div></div><p> The character set can be set for both the file being read and the file being
                written. The character set is the system for pairing computer character codes with
                the character glyphes that we read. The widely used standard was originally ASCII,
                but this does not include diacritic characters, and characters specific to certain
                languages. There have since been many character encodings proposed (e.g ISO
                8859-1 for Western Europe and ISO 8859-7 for Greece) as well as some that are
                specific to Windows and Mac operating systems (e.g. Windows-1252 and MacRoman). The 
                character set this is becoming most widely used is the Unicode UTF-8. This is capable
                of representing all 107,000+ distinct characters while remaining backwards compatible
                with ASCII for the 128 characters that it ASCII is able to represent.   
            </p><p> If an incorrect character encoding is used to interpret a file, normally the
                majority of characters will display correctly (where the character sets share the
                same encodings) but more unusual characters will be displayed incorrectly -
                typically square boxes or question marks. </p><p> TRiCYCLE can using the NIO package to attempt to automatically detect which
                encoding a file is in. Unfortunately, there is no full-proof way to do this so by
                default, this feature is turned off. If you are having problems with character
                encodings you may like to choose 'Automatic' in the charset box if you have no idea
                what character encoding your file is in. </p><p> The character encoding is set to the default for the operating system you are
                running. For instance on MacOSX this will be MacRoman and for Windows it will be
                Windows-1250. If you know your input file is in a different encoding you should set
                it in the input charset box. If your output file needs to be read on an operating
                system other than the one you are currently running, then you may like to override
                the writer charset. Please note that for certain writers the character set used is
                part of the file specification (e.g. TRiDaS must be UTF-8). In this case your choice
                will be ignored. </p><p> The final complication with regards character sets is the line feed character(s).
                For historical reasons different operating systems use different characters to
                represent a new line. Depending on the software that is used to read a file, this
                can cause problems. TRiCYCLE itself will automatically adapt to files with any type
                of line feed characters so reading files in TRiCYCLE will never be a problem. When
                writing out files, TRiCYCLE will use the default line feed for the operating system
                you are running on unless you choose a platform specific character set. For instance
                if you run TRiCYCLE on Windows and choose a MacRoman writing charset, TRiCYCLE will
                use Mac style line feeds. </p></div><div class="section" title="Metadata editor"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e201"/>Metadata editor</h2></div></div></div><p> TRiCYCLE works by reading in a data file and translating it into the TRiDaS data
                model. TRiDaS has a rich array of fields to represent all manor of dendro data and
                metadata. Although most of these are optional, the TRiDaS specification requires
                that a handful of these are always filled in. Unfortunately many of the legacy data
                formats do not contain information for these mandatory fields, therefore TRiCYCLE
                must fill these with default values. The metadata editor enables you to override
                these default values. </p><p> Clicking on the reader metadata editor button in the options window will give a
                table of all the metadata fields that will be set automatically by TRiCYCLE along
                with their current values. You can change most of these with the exception of those
                that are required to be a controlled vocabulary. These will require a more
                complicated interface which we haven't had time to implement yet. The third column
                in the editor is a tick box to specify whether the value is overriding or not. If
                ticked, the value specified in this editor will be used regardless of whether a
                value can be extracted by TRiCYCLE from the input datafiles. </p><p> An identical editor is available for the writer. These are the default values
                used by the writer code for your chosen output format. For instance, TRiDaS does not
                require that a start year field be set (as in the case of relatively dated series),
                whereas some output formats do require such a field. If an input file does not
                contain start year information then some writers need to know which default value
                for start year to use. Like for the input metadata editor, you can set fields to
                'overriding' which means they will be used regardless of whether this information is
                available in the input dataset. </p></div><div class="section" title="Naming convention"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e210"/>Naming convention</h2></div></div></div><p> Some file formats can contain just one data series while other can contain many.
                When converting from a multi-series format to a single series format this means that
                one input file is converted to multiple output files. The naming convention is used
                to determine how to name the output files. The naming convention relates to the
                filename itself and not the file extension. The file extension is specific to the
                output format chosen (e.g. Heidelberg files are .fh and TRiDaS files are .xml). </p><p>
                </p><div class="variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="term">Numerical</span></dt><dd><p>This is the default naming convention. It uses the name of the
                                input data file and appends an incrementing number if more than one
                                output file is produced.</p></dd><dt><span class="term">UUID</span></dt><dd><p>This gives all output files a random named based on Universally
                                Unique Identifiers (UUIDs). This is a 36 character hexidecimal code
                                which due to the astronomically large number of possible
                                combinations is garanteed to be universally unique. A typical
                                filename will look like:
                                550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000.</p></dd><dt><span class="term">Hierarchical</span></dt><dd><p>This uses the hierarchical structure of the TRiDaS data model to
                                provide a meaningful name for the output file. It joins together the
                                title of each entity in the file beginning with the project name
                                through to the series name. For files that contain multiple series,
                                the name will contain details of all the entities shared by all the
                                series in the file. For example, if a file contains several series
                                from the same sample, then the file name will be
                                projectTitle-objectTitle-elementTitle-sampleTitle. If the file
                                contains several series from different samples of the same object,
                                then the file would be projectTitle-objectTitle. If multiple output
                                files end up with the same name then like the numerical convention
                                described above, the files will have an incremental number appended
                                to the end. Unfortunately, most input data files do not contain rich
                                name information so files end up being called
                                unnamedProject-unnamedObject-unnamedElement etc. This convention is
                                therefore more appropriate when converting from TRiDaS to other
                                formats. </p></dd></dl></div><p>
            </p></div></div><div class="chapter" title="Chapter 5. Help and more information"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e237"/>Chapter 5. Help and more information</h2></div></div></div><p>The best place to start is through the TRiDaS website (
            <a class="link" href="http://www.tridas.org" target="_top">www.tridas.org</a>) and the Dendro Data Standards
            forum.  The forum is a email list for the discussion of TRiDaS and other dendro data standards
            issues.  It is open to all to join by emailing 
            <a class="link" href="mailto:p.brewer@cornell.edu" target="_top">Peter Brewer</a>.  
        </p><p>
            TRiCYCLE is an open source product therefore we are very pleased to welcome anyone that would like
            to assist in its development.  This obviously includes programmers, but also people willing to
            help with documentation and translations too.  To find out more information please contact
            <a class="link" href="mailto:p.brewer@cornell.edu" target="_top">Peter Brewer</a>.
        </p></div><div class="bibliography" title="Bibliography"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e261"/>Bibliography</h2></div></div></div><div class="biblioentry" title="Tree-ring analysis using CATRAS"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e262"/><p><span class="authorgroup"><span class="firstname">R</span> <span class="surname">Aniol</span>. </span><span class="pubdate">1983. </span><span class="title"><i>Tree-ring analysis using CATRAS</i>. </span><span class="publishername">Dendrochronologia. </span><span class="seriesvolnums">1. </span><span class="pagenums">45-53. </span></p></div><div class="biblioentry" title="A new approach to dendrochronological data management"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e280"/><p><span class="authorgroup"><span class="firstname">P</span> <span class="surname">Brewer</span>, <span class="firstname">K</span> <span class="surname">Sturgeon</span>, <span class="firstname">L</span> <span class="surname">Madar</span>, and <span class="firstname">S</span> <span class="surname">Manning</span>. </span><span class="pubdate">2010. </span><span class="title"><i>A new approach to dendrochronological data management</i>. </span><span class="publishername">Dendrochronologia. </span><span class="seriesvolnums">28. </span><span class="pagenums">131-134. </span></p></div><div class="biblioentry" title="TRiCYCLE: a universal dendro data conversion tool"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="BrewerInReview"/><p>[<abbr class="abbrev"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="BrewerInReviewCite"/>Brewer (in review)</abbr>] <span class="authorgroup"><span class="firstname">P</span> <span class="surname">Brewer</span>, <span class="firstname">D</span> <span class="surname">Murphy</span>, and <span class="firstname">E</span> <span class="surname">Jansma</span>. </span><span class="pubdate">in review. </span><span class="title"><i>TRiCYCLE: a universal dendro data conversion tool</i>. </span><span class="publishername">Tree-Ring Research. </span></p></div><div class="biblioentry" title="A dendrochronology program library in R (dplR)"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e344"/><p><span class="authorgroup"><span class="firstname">A</span> <span class="surname">Bunn</span>. </span><span class="pubdate">2008. </span><span class="title"><i>A dendrochronology program library in R (dplR)</i>. </span><span class="publishername">Dendrochronologia. </span><span class="seriesvolnums">26. </span><span class="pagenums">115-124. </span></p></div><div class="biblioentry" title="Computer-assisted quality control in tree-ring dating and measurement"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e362"/><p><span class="authorgroup"><span class="firstname">R</span> <span class="surname">Holmes</span>. </span><span class="pubdate">1983. </span><span class="title"><i>Computer-assisted quality control in tree-ring dating and measurement</i>. </span><span class="publishername">Tree-Ring Bulletin. </span><span class="seriesvolnums">43. </span><span class="pagenums">69-78. </span></p></div><div class="biblioentry" title="Dendrochronology Program Library (DPL)"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e380"/><p><span class="authorgroup"><span class="firstname">R</span> <span class="surname">Holmes</span>. </span><span class="pubdate">2001. </span><span class="title"><i>Dendrochronology Program Library (DPL)</i>. </span><span class="publishername">The University of Arizona, Tucson.. </span></p></div><div class="biblioentry" title="TRiDaS 1.1: The tree-ring data standard"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e394"/><p><span class="authorgroup"><span class="firstname">E</span> <span class="surname">Jansma</span>, <span class="firstname">P</span> <span class="surname">Brewer</span>, and <span class="firstname">I</span> <span class="surname">Zandhuis</span>. </span><span class="pubdate">2010. </span><span class="title"><i>TRiDaS 1.1: The tree-ring data standard</i>. </span><span class="publishername">Dendrochronologia. </span><span class="seriesvolnums">28. </span><span class="pagenums">99-130. </span></p></div><div class="biblioentry" title="PAST4 - Personal Analysis System for Tree Ring Research. Software version 4.5"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e424"/><p><span class="authorgroup"><span class="firstname">B</span> <span class="surname">Knibbe</span>. </span><span class="pubdate">2008. </span><span class="title"><i>PAST4 - Personal Analysis System for Tree Ring Research. Software version
                4.5</i>. </span><span class="publishername">SCIEM. </span></p></div><div class="biblioentry" title="TSAP-Win software"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e438"/><p><span class="authorgroup"><span class="firstname">F</span> <span class="surname">Rinn</span>. </span><span class="pubdate">2008. </span><span class="title"><i>TSAP-Win software</i>. </span><span class="publishername">Rinntech, Heidelberg. </span></p></div><div class="biblioentry" title="Fundamentals of Tree Ring Research"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e452"/><p><span class="authorgroup"><span class="firstname">J</span> <span class="surname">Speer</span>. </span><span class="pubdate">2010. </span><span class="title"><i>Fundamentals of Tree Ring Research</i>. </span><span class="publishername">University of Arizona Press. </span></p></div><div class="biblioentry" title="Dendro For Windows program guide"><a xmlns:saxon="http://icl.com/saxon" id="d0e466"/><p><span class="authorgroup"><span class="firstname">I</span> <span class="surname">Tyers</span>. </span><span class="pubdate">1999. </span><span class="title"><i>Dendro For Windows program guide</i>. </span><span class="publishername">ARCUS Report 500. </span></p></div></div></div></body></html>